thank you so much Stuart thank you so
much for inviting me here this is this
is really quite an honor so I want to
say plenty of time for questions I know
we're going to talk soon so I'll just
start by telling you a little bit about
how I became a speechwriter and and then
share three really quick stories before
we get into the Q&A so I didn't grow up
thinking that I would pursue a career in
politics and I sort of fell into speech
writing completely by chance in college
I've been an intern for John Kerry and
when I graduated I was offered a job on
his campaign the title was assistant
press secretary which was a fancier way
of saying that I answered the phones got
people coffee and and woke up at 4:30
a.m. every morning to send around the
day's news stories to to everyone in the
campaign I never slept I drank too much
gained about 20 pounds so it was a very
glamorous life and then one day the
campaign's chief speechwriter was
unfortunately for him moved to the desk
right next to mine
and I thought he had the greatest job in
the world so of course I bugged him in
the way that at 22 year old assistants
bugged people that they professionally
admire I asked him any questions I offer
too much help and then one day I finally
found the courage to ask him if I could
be his deputy speechwriter and he
immediately said no but then but then
one day after that when the campaign was
losing and broke and couldn't afford to
hire a real deputy speechwriter I became
the most affordable option available so
I so I was John Kerry's deputy
speechwriter and then a few months later
came my second lucky break though it
didn't seem so at the time during the
2004 Democratic convention in Boston I
was assigned the task of making sure
that all the speakers and speeches
reflected the message of the Kerry
campaign to the extent that there was a
message of the Kerry campaign
some days it was hard to tell and one
day I get a call from the powers that be
on the campaign who told me that there
was a problem with the draft of the
keynote address being delivered by the
young senator from Illinois Barack Obama
apparently Obama had written the exact
same line in his keynote address that
Kerry wanted to use in his convention
speech and somehow my job was to walk
down the hall interrupt Barack Obama's
speech prep and ask him to change the
line so that was a enviable task that I
was assigned so I sheepishly walk into
the room where Obama is practicing his
speech for the very first time mumbled
something about the line and then Locke
blacked out for a few seconds and when I
came to Obama was within a couple inches
in my face glaring down at me and asked
are you seriously telling me I have to
take out my favorite line from this
speech so great first impression with my
future boss and at that point you know I
figured I would never talk to Barack
Obama again which was really too bad
because when I heard his keynote the
next night I thought it represented
everything that was missing from
politics it was honest it was authentic
it didn't sound like language that came
from a consultant or a pollster it told
a story and then John Kerry lost and I
was crushed that was only 23 years old
but I had already become desperately
cynical about politics I wanted to give
it all up and that point I sort of had
to because I was completely broke so
broke that when I drove home to Boston
from Washington to move back in with my
parents
I actually didn't have enough money to
pay the last toll on the highway and had
no choice but to speed through the red
light so that was rock bottom and then a
couple weeks later I received an email
that changed my life one of my bosses
from the Kerry campaign was now a top
aide to Senator Barack Obama and told me
that he was looking to hire his very
first speechwriter
my interview with Obama was surprisingly
easy we talked about our families talked
about where we grew up talked about why
we both got into politics but most of
all we didn't talk about the line I made
him remove from his convention speech
because he didn't remember it was me so
that was very lucky and and then at the
end of the conversation he said
something I'll never forget he said I
still don't think I need a speechwriter
but you seem nice enough so that's how I
got that job so like I said three quick
stories and then we get into Q&A and
these are things that I learned by
working with Barack Obama first story I
want to tell is about authenticity so
sometime around March in the 2008
campaign the media uncovers a series of
videos that show Barack Obama's pastor
Reverend Jeremiah white right making
some very anti-american anti-white
comments in church now this is the man
who married the Obamas who baptized
their children and whose church the
family had been going to for many many
years so it's a big problem now
initially our campaign a lot of advisers
on the campaign advised the president to
play it safe they said let's drop some
talking points let's set up interviews
on all the cable news channels and
hopefully we don't have to get into any
of the messy details and we can just
skate by this but the president decided
that he didn't want to play it safe he
wanted to give a speech about race in
America and as someone who thought he
might be the first African American
president in history
he'd been wanting to give a speech on
race for quite some time but our
advisors kept putting it off because we
were trying to win Iowa the state that
has at most two or three African
Americans but Obama said I don't care
anymore the only way that I'm getting
through this is if I give the speech and
I give it the way I want to give it so
he decides that he wants to give the
speech in a Friday Saturday morning
everyone tells me that he wants to give
the speech and they tell me that it's
going to be Tuesday and they asked me to
please produce a draft
and then I said some things that aren't
fit for saying right now and and I said
to them I'm not I'm not writing a draft
I'm not even starting a draft until I
get to talk to him because this is an
incredibly personal thing so after
campaigning until about 10:00 p.m. that
Saturday he called me to lay out the
speech that he would give in
Philadelphia
a few days later and if you look at that
speech today I can tell you that the
parts that I wrote were parts that could
have been delivered by any politician
the parts that Barack Obama wrote were
lines like I can no more disown Reverend
Wright than I can my white grandmother a
woman who loves me as much as she loves
anything in this world but who more than
once his uttered racial or ethnic
stereotypes that made me cringe that's
not a line that any speech writer or
strategist would have suggested to their
boss if they wanted to keep their job
and I remember that after the speech was
over the president called and said I
don't know if this speech will make the
problem go away and I don't know if you
can get elected president saying the
things I did about race but I also know
that I don't deserve to be President if
I'm too afraid to say what I believe so
the second story I want to tell you is
about humor one of the best pieces of
advice that I've ever received is take
your job seriously but don't take
yourself too seriously so I'll give you
an example some of you may remember that
back in 2011 there were some critical
unanswered questions about whether
President Barack Obama was actually born
in the United States
fortunately for America a man some of
you may have heard of named Donald Trump
was on the case so so Trump it's hard to
believe this happened Trump sent a full
team of investigators to Hawaii to
uncover the birth certificate and much
to our surprise at some point we were
standing there in the White House and
the president had his lawyer fly to
Hawaii and fly back the actual long-form
birth certificate so he could present it
to America in
the press corps in the White House press
briefing room in on one Friday afternoon
so as usual a very productive day in
Washington and yet even after all that
nothing put the birth certificate
controversy to rest more than the jokes
the president told about it at the White
House Correspondents Dinner that very
same weekend so we had decided at that
point that we were going to really go
after Trump and really go on the birth
and just make light of the birth
certificate thing to really put it to
rest once and for all so the president
walked out on stage and announced that
mr. Trump's investigators had also
uncovered the president's live birth
video which he was willing to play in
the interest of full disclosure and as
the video began playing the crowd
erupted when they realized it was
actually the birth of Simba from The
Lion King with circle of life blaring in
the background and I had the pleasure of
being seated directly behind Donald
Trump at the dinner and he was not very
happy now I have told the story many
times and usually at this point I say
and fortunately we haven't heard from
mr. Trump again I can no longer say that
but I was asked the other day by via by
the editor-in-chief of BuzzFeed if I had
if I felt responsible for trolling
Donald Trump into running for president
because some people think that he was so
angry at that dinner of how embarrassed
and humiliated he'd become that he had
bowed to get his revenge there so hoping
that didn't happen but I just I checked
YouTube the other day and the video of
the press conference where Obama showed
his real birth certificate sort of the
substantive moment where he actually
presented proof has 44,000 views on
YouTube The Lion King video has over 6
million right now just to give you an
idea of the effectiveness of humor and
politics that we somehow sometimes
underestimate last story I want to tell
is about idealism it is really difficult
to maintain your idealism today and I
completely understand why cynicism can
seem like a logical response to the
daily flood of headlines about problems
that can't be solved and people who
behave badly celebrities and CEOs and
politicians who are supposedly driven
only by ego and ambition and greed it's
hardly original to point out that trust
in major institutions has declined all
over the world as more of our leaders
mistakes and deficiencies are revealed
and reported and analyzed over and over
again but here's the truth so long as
institutions like government media
business and faith are created by human
beings with all our faults and
imperfections
they will frustrate us and they will
disappoint us
and they will let us down cynicism is
one response to this reality if you want
you can approach the world with constant
distrust and suspicion you can be a
critic who just throws rocks from the
sidelines which requires very little
effort or creativity you can disengage
from the public debate altogether and
leave the big decisions about your
future to somebody else but just
remember cynicism isn't the only
response to humanities and adequacies
and limitations cynicism is a choice it
is just as much of a choice as service
to others
or commitment to a worthy cause as my
old boss taught me cynicism is just as
much of a choice as hope is from
conflicts to tragedies to outbreaks
there is a lot of bad news out there but
despite all the turmoil it is also true
that we live in a world where fewer
people are dying young and more people
are living longer it is a world where
there are more girls in school more
adults who can read a world with less
hunger less poverty less deadly disease
at at anytime in human history
it is a world where fewer nations are at
war and more democracies are protecting
more people's basic human rights all of
these trends are real and none none are
the result of vague forces or happy
accidents people made this progress
people chose to make this progress many
people working over many years people in
governments and nonprofits people with
great power and wealth and people with
very little of either people who despite
all of their flaws and their failings
and their shortcomings decided to press
forward believing against all odds that
there has to be an upward trajectory to
the journey that we're on together I'll
be honest I I fight the urge to be
cynical every single time I turn on the
news but in those moments I often think
about one of the most inspiring things
I've experienced during my time in
politics it was the night of the 2008
election but it wasn't the moment that
they called the race for Barack Obama it
was earlier as I was making edits to
that night's speech the draft ended with
a story we found about a woman from
Atlanta named Ann Nixon Cooper who could
wait in line that day for three hours to
cast her ballot three hours and what
made that story so special was the fact
that Ann Nixon Cooper was a hundred and
six years old she was born at a time
when she wasn't allowed to vote for two
reasons because she was a woman
and because she was african-american so
was there was election results start
looking good my friend points out that
you know we should probably call an
Nixon Cooper and let her know that she's
about to get a little bit of a shout out
so we find her number and I give her a
call and I tell this frail lovely woman
that a man who's about to become the
first black president of the United
States wants to mention her in his
victory speech and there's a pause on
the line and I started thinking about
all that and Nixon Cooper endured for a
century that was marked by war and
depression by brutal prejudice and
discrimination a century where she
pressed on as a tutor and a church
volunteer and a civil rights activist as
a wife and a mother and a grandmother a
century where she somehow lived to see
progress she must have only dreamed
about as a child women's rights voting
rights and civil rights for all and just
then and Nixon Cooper interrupted my
thoughts with a very important question
about that night speech will it be on
television I told her yes yes it would
be on television and and so she thought
about that for a little while longer
and she asked which channel will it be
on and I said all the channels mm ah and
then she said I'm so happy I'm so proud
finally and that point she started to
cry and I did too and right at that very
moment they called Ohio and the race was
over and everyone starts cheering and I
hid under my desk for a few more minutes
to talk to and Nixon Cooper now not all
the days were that fulfilling we had
just as many downs as we did ups and the
work was hard and the hours were long
and it was frustrating we made plenty of
mistakes we still do but every once in a
while there are moments that remind us
why it is we do what we do and I would
just ask you if you can learn and
recognize and appreciate those moments
you'll find it's a lot easier to keep
doing that work and with that I'm happy
to take your questions
but John thanks very much that that was
that was fantastic and as I just said to
you you wanted most of the questions I
already had down here held on - right
okay um but notes first of I must ask
what's it like writing a speech for
yourself now rather than for President
Barack Obama it's funny it's uh I
thought it would be easy and it wasn't
when I when I first started doing it
because uh you know like finding my own
voice after writing for the president
that line was trickier than I thought it
would be I guess I didn't realize like
even I even picked up his verbal tics
right like I say look a lot and look
what I have said right which is like a
classic Barack Obama thing and my
friends and family make fun of me for
that a lot but um you know once you get
past that and once it's very freeing and
very liberating after a while because
you know I love to write long before I
was a speechwriter when I was little I
would write stories and stuff like that
and you know if I've always enjoyed that
very much so it's been a lot of fun to
start writing again yeah and you say is
it's difficult to get back to your own
voice yeah couple of days ago you took
on a very different voice with a speech
you write
you wrote Siri what Donald Trump's
victory speech would be a favor to get
the Republican nomination yes I did how
did it feel to slip into those shoes or
that huh it's terrifying how to
immediately take a shower after I was
done no I wrote that I mean so the
reason I wrote that column is because
you know I think Trump has very
successfully won a lot of media
attention by you know with the more
inflammatory things he said the insults
the name-calling the Muslim ban you know
all of that stuff and but he's also very
smart and if you really look at his
speeches and the speech that I wrote
that the Donald Trump speeches that I
wrote was basically like I said 90% of
it was language that he's already used
and I think that should he get the
nomination which is a real probability
at this point he may if he's smart
enough
moderate himself and he doesn't have to
pick up you a lot of people say oh we
wins the nomination he's going to have
to pivot and like kind of give up a lot
of his more extremist positions - you
know appeal to a broader electorate he's
never going to be able to do that but
some of the things that he's been
talking about whether it's you know
hedge fund guys didn't build America and
we need to tax them more we should have
health we know we should repeal Obama
care but we should have health universal
health care in this country we should
pay for it with an increase in corporate
taxes we should get rid of trade deals
because they're taking away American
jobs we like so one thing after another
they're very populist and moderate
positions that could appeal to a lot of
people and so I sort of just wanted to
prepare everyone for what we might hear
so people can get rid of the argument
now I mean I think I think if it's if
it's you know Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton
I do think MS Clinton has will win that
race but I don't think it's I don't
think any race against Donald Trump is
going to be the easiest race like I
think he could he could put up a fight
by moderating his positions and sounding
very populist the anti-establishment
and do you think you're going to get a
call anytime soon to be his director of
speechwriting god I hope not
but I know my answer so that's why you
mentioned the incident with Barack
Obama's birth certificate yeah there
must have been so many times working in
the White House where you just despair
at the state of American politics and
particularly that the media in America
I can't imagine you have too fond
memories of Fox News for example I don't
I don't know look I think I think it's a
huge problem
I was saying earlier in a way anok
Donald Trump is a personification of
what we see in political media today and
what the media chooses to elevate today
right so if you are a casual observer of
the news what you see and this you know
I the tough thing is everyone starts
critiquing the news and people
automatically assume it's a left-right
thing or it's a Fox News versus MSNBC
thing that forget about that right you
turn on CNN right you're like
to see something sensational something
scary you're likely to see people say
that politicians that we are governed by
people who are corrupt and stupid and
that there are really bad things
happening in the world and that's it
there's no good news it's only bad news
and we should all be scared and and
these are the people that you want to
blame for all these problems and that's
actually what Donald Trump's candidacy
is he does all those things and I think
that you know part of this is you know
that the the industry of of journalism
is such right now that you know it's
hard to they go where the clicks are
right because they are trying to make a
profit that is business but I've started
ik waiting this to you know we now tell
food companies that even though
Americans really like sugar
we shouldn't poison so many Americans
with sugar because it's not good for
them and so I think sometimes the need
will say like oh well you know it's it's
the American public that's clicking on
these sensational stories it's the
American public that wants conflict
that's what sells absolutely and and
we're to blame Oh in many ways for
clicking on this stuff in the same sense
like there is a responsibility that the
media has to present nuance and subtlety
and substance that you know at leontiev
II right now they're not taking
seriously and I think that helps give
rise to extreme pessimism and cynicism
in the country there's an interesting
figure I saw the other day right which
is a fiasco Americans about what do you
thing about the direction of the country
you know right track wrong track or
that's called in politics you know the
wrong track is very very very high 60 70
% right track is like 20% right it's
almost as bad as it's ever been when you
ask people how do you feel about your
personal life
are you happy with your finances with
your family with what's going on it's
actually people are feeling better than
they have in a very very long time it's
almost a record high
so you think yourself why is there a
discrepancy between what people feel
about their own life and what they can
see in their own lives versus what
they're
learning about the country well where do
people learn about their country where
do people hear about how do they form
opinions on the rest of the world they
do it through the news and the news can
be a very dark scary place and out but
there's really there's a lot of problems
in the world there's a lot of bad things
going on that the media should cover but
I think there's there's a balance
between covering the bad and covering
the good news and giving people hope and
giving people ideas about solutions to
these problems and I think that balance
is off you're definitely right when you
say conflict as well
red cells this one you mean media love
to have and perhaps that's not anywhere
more apparent than in presidential
debates and with candidates debates and
so when you were pairing speeches for
that
with President Obama what you were
involved in those what's the difference
in preparing those speeches and those
sections of text compared to an
inauguration speech or something like
that the main difference is he did not
like it too much you know the president
has never been a fan of debates
he's never been you never excelled the
debates it debates in general or started
debating that we see on American
television
that's right beside one debate that you
see on American television because you
know he saw very early on that it is a
it's a game right
and it's sport and you know you have 60
seconds on one side seconds on the other
side and you know the way that you
answer a question is I mean he is first
and for he was a lawyer he's a professor
and he's used to Bill he's used to
constructing and building arguments that
are logical that start from a certain
point and oftentimes with the debate
answer you have to at least in American
political debates you have to flip that
on its head
and you sort of start with the soundbite
and the main idea and then you sort of
go backwards and you have to also get a
hit in on your opponent you have to have
a quotable line in there and basically
it it makes you seem foe near and more
staged and those are all the things that
the president pushes against and you
know it came to a head in his obviously
he didn't do that well in his first
debate with Mitt Romney and during the
re-election and as we were preparing for
the second debate he you know he sort of
admitted to every
one like I'm not great at this and I'm
not great at memorizing these quick
one-liners and these 30-second responses
because it doesn't feel authentic to me
and so he really it took a lot of work
for him to figure that out
now the way that we ended up doing it
was finally said okay you just give the
answer that you want to give during prep
and then starting from the answers that
you really want to give will just help
you shape it so that at least it comes
from you and it's authentic to you as
opposed to just feeding you a bunch of
lines and and that worked a little bit
better and you know he was he was more
successful in that second debate senior
debate it seems that's what makes a
successful politician changing your
biggest weakness - your biggest strength
yeah that was the approach you seem to
go for I'm thinking of something a
little bit different so after yourself
you are it's still very young you were
very young when you became the director
of speechwriting the second youngest I
believe in the white house do you think
that helps do you think that helped the
relationship with President Barack Obama
or I mean do you think I said no impact
at all I think it helped a little in the
sense that I hadn't been you know he
succeeded as a politician because he
wasn't around Washington and in politics
for a very long time and so a lot of the
bad habits that politicians have a lot
of the cautions that get built into
being a politician he didn't he didn't
have those and he was willing to take on
the establishment and say okay the way
that works the way that's always worked
is really silly and politics is a silly
game in a lot of ways and I'm not going
to play that game and to the extent that
I was new and young and had been around
politics very long either
you know I was able to to write for him
that way and look and I also my my one
experience in national politics before
that like I said was the Kerry campaign
and you know I saw from I learned from
that campaign you know I think there was
a lot of times where you know the real
John Kerry didn't come out right there's
this thing that happens in American
politics where whenever a presidential
candidate loses they they tend to give
some speech after
they lose the race whether it's Al Gore
Mitt Romney or John Kerry and then it's
this wonderful speech and then everyone
the meeting ever in the country says oh
where was that guy during the race
you know where is that John Kerry where
was that Mitt Romney it's like well you
know where they were they were in a
campaign where all of their advisors and
everyone around them somehow made them
too afraid and too cautious to just be
who they are and to be themselves and I
think that's partly what happened to a
lot of our candidates and and Barack
Obama to his credit in 2008 you know he
ran like he didn't have anything to lose
and and and that helped him succeed I
think because if you run like that
you're if you're your authentic self
you're going to be more successful and
it may not work right like sometimes you
can be your authentic self and people
say well I don't like it
right but it's worth trying that because
if for no other reason then it's the
easiest thing to do just be yourself and
say what you believe and would you say
that so your relationship with Barack
Obama because professionally you grew up
with him you know you didn't firstly you
didn't necessarily know the trade hugely
well before working with him so you
didn't have methods that didn't
necessarily work he kind of learnt those
methods together yeah no I mean one of
the great gifts of the job that I had
was you know I learned to be I learned
about politics and I learned to also be
a writer from Barack Obama who was a
brilliant writer in his own right but
you know we mean a lot a lot of us on
the campaign not just that not just the
president myself you know we sort of
took the journey and learn the journey
of politics together which was you know
it was pretty amazing that's his final
question for me before
opening up to the floor so in your
speech just then you said that with a
present brock obama's race relations
speech in 2008 he suggested a line that
if any speech writer suggested to him or
any other politician they'd probably get
fired yeah did you find that the more
you worked with him the more bold your
suggestions became and the better you
knew him the more personal you'd be in
your suggestions I do uh I mean by the
time you know the reason I was able to I
felt more liberated to suggest lines and
ideas and talk like that is because he
was he just
made me and everyone who worked with him
feel so comfortable about doing that
right so there's plenty of times where I
would I would send a speech draft in I
would get his edits and he'd say okay
I'm changing this and I maybe I wouldn't
agree with the change and then I'd say
okay well the reason I originally had it
this way was because of X and you know
what do you think
and he'd either say oh I get what you
were trying to do so let's let's let's
go with that or he'd say no we're gonna
do it my way said that more um but he
never made it he never made me like
scared to do that right he was always
kind he was always patient I mean people
don't believe when I said this but in
eight years of working for him he never
raised his voice once he was never
annoyed he never got angry with me I
mean he was just he has the sort of
personality you'd want in a pret in a
leader regardless of party regardless of
ideology and that's something I don't
think I learned until you know I got to
the White House and I was really
involved in politics is you know I want
someone to be president to be a leader
who believes in the issues that I you
know believes in my positions and I
agree with on the issues and were
ideologically aligned but also I want
someone with a temperament right and a
calm and a steady nature to be President
and I think those qualities serve
leaders very well and they're sort of
underestimated in politics today
so then sorry this is the last one so
then why why did he leave before the
presidency I was very tired oh no I mean
it's it you know III was with him for
eight years including the time of the
Senate before that I was on the Kerry
campaign so I spent all of my 20s
running around on campaigns and being a
speechwriter and you know it's probably
the best job I'll ever have but I
couldn't plan a life and it wasn't just
the hours because sometimes you know if
Buster wasn't speaking I'd have time off
but it was not being able to plan
anything so you couldn't plan a weekend
you couldn't plan a night you can plan a
vacation there were you know when I was
when I was working on the second
inaugural and it was the day after
Christmas and I was like locked away and
couldn't see my family because I was
once again using a Christmas tee the
right of State of the Union or inaugural
and not speaking with my family
I was like maybe it's time to get out of
here they're all worse but I spent
Christmases with yeah that's true that's
alright thank you for that job so now if
you have a question please raise your
hand high in the air and then wait for a
microphone to come to you which will
amplify your voice if we could go to the
member who's currently yes - couple rows
back three rows back yeah I recently
read a comment made by Marco Rubio that
Obama is intentionally attempting to
destroy America yeah and this seems to
be a message reflected by all of the
Republican and even some Democratic
candidates so my question is how do you
account for the popularity of anti Obama
rhetoric throughout the nomination in
the media this time around or just
talking around specifically but as well
that comment by Marco Rubio is so out of
line and so extreme it's like oh I don't
remember I don't remember like as a
Democrat right I disagreed strongly with
george w bush and a lot of things he did
there in the presidency right I believe
he did those things because he had a
certain set of beliefs that led him to
those decisions and I don't think any of
those beliefs was George Bush getting to
the White House and thinking now I want
to destroy America right I don't think
anyone runs for office thinking yeah you
know what I want to destroy the country
that I'm part of it's insane
though that is an insane comment to make
and you know but fine if he wants to
make it because I actually have enough I
think was a big mistake and they're not
in what the reason that Marco Rubio and
his campaign made that comment is
because Rubio is in a position where he
feels like he is not it's basically like
a race to see who can be the craziest
right and Rubio's worried that he's
losing that race to Donald Trump it to
Ted Cruz and he doesn't want to take he
doesn't want to talk about his positions
because he's thinking himself okay I
could actually get to the general
election and if all my comments are
about my positions if I go out there and
talk about how you know I'm against
abortion even in cases of incest and
rape you know that's going to hurt me in
the general the one thing that won't
hurt me in the general is if I just talk
about how awful Barack Obama is
so his advisers are probably telling him
that the way to appeal to your base
forget about issues just just hit Obama
as much as possible and then be positive
and hopeful about the country right and
sound like an optimist so that's his
plan but he took it too far by saying
that comment and not walking back from
it either because I think in a general
election when the American people are
faced with someone who believes that the
guy in office right now is intentionally
trying to destroy America they're not
they're not going to buy that you know
and and it's crazy too because it's like
you know I like if he really thinks that
Obama's trying to destroy America
intentionally why hasn't he called for
Obama's impeachment why doesn't think
why doesn't he think Obama should be
tried for treason if the if the
commander-in-chief is intentionally
trying to destroy the country I mean
it's just it's so insane I have strong
feelings about that thank you a question
if we could please go to the member here
in the second row hi so while the global
media can really pick up one line from
the entire speech yes they projected
that something you know very different
from what out of context right so as the
writer because you've just mentioned
that within the duration of two days you
will have to present a speech how did
you manage that and number two how true
is house of cards it's going to happen
at some point I know I know I'll take
the second question first it's not at
all like house of cards I won't give you
away any plot points and house of cards
in case that he wants to see it but no I
mean house of cards is just it's it's
just like a soap opera really but uh no
in terms of what lines are going to get
picked up in a speech you want to be
somewhat cognizant of that but I think
there's a danger in writing the speech
all you know to make it all about sound
bites right because before I started
working for Barack Obama you know I sort
of speech I saw speeches in American
politics is like a collection of sound
and applause lines and I think a lot of
politicians in both parties sort of do
that to this day and what Obama taught
me and what he showed the world on stage
the 2004 convention is that a really
good speech as a story from beginning to
end and sometimes when you're telling a
story from beginning to end like he did
in that speech it's hard to find one or
two lines to take out and have that be
like the quote you know there was a
reporter who I was asked me okay that
speech that you just did what's the
etched in stone line from that speech
which which line you see etched and son
and I would always disappoint him by
telling him like I don't know and you
know perhaps you know there were times
when we should have thought harder about
having making sure the quotes were very
quotable but to the President to myself
the most important job of a speech is to
tell a story from beginning to end and
to put together a logical argument and
also to make it sound authentic and
sometimes when you're thinking about you
know what's going to be the line that
Twitter picks up or the news or
something like that
you sort of forced into writing a line
that sounds a little more phony and
constructed than you might as you're
just having a conversation with someone
right so I try to actually avoid that as
much as possible and and and hope and
have faith that people will watch the
whole speech I was saying on that on the
race Beach president gave that speech in
the middle of a Tuesday afternoon and
you know only the cable networks covered
it and immediately after he was finished
a lot of the pundits on cable were like
you know he might have made him speak
mistake and given that speech in the
middle of the day because it was really
long and there was no quotable lines and
it wasn't primetime and you know you
know so will the race speech break
through and you know it turned out that
within a couple weeks and then a couple
months there were like thousands of
millions of views of the race speech on
YouTube and people had taken the time to
go watch that entire speech so even
though they might have seen a clip on
the news that wasn't the best sound bite
they could probably tell from that
speech that it sounded different and
authentic enough that they wanted to go
find more you know so if you're if you
deliver a speech that's real and true to
who you are
and it's telling a good story even if
someone only sees a small snippet of it
they're probably likely to go find that
whole speech as opposed to oh I just saw
a snappy soundbite on the news hope that
happens all the time
so that's not very different I'll get in
there for someone else does if it's not
like house of cards is it like the west
wing it is a combination of the west
wing on its good days and veep on its
bad day that's what I would say a lot of
complications and if we could please go
to the number on the front row here the
heaven a major motif in Obama's speeches
is cynicism and defying cynicism and you
even brought it up here and so would you
say that like you find your hope in the
American public restored by working with
Obama so much in writing these speeches
that say ban said ban cynicism like you
do you think that that's you know giving
you a restored sort of faith in our in
the public even though a lot of people
kind of to kind of reprimand and
chastise it for being uninformed and
everything look I think it's I think
it's a major it was a major theme of his
candidacy it's a major theme of his
public life he right before he ran but
he was thinking about running he gave a
speech where he said you know our our
biggest obstacle in this race our
biggest obstacle as a country right now
is cynicism he gets sort of mocked for
that vibe like you know the DC set but
what he meant was it's this belief that
we shouldn't even try right that's the
problem of cynicism I think I think
skepticism is healthy right I think and
the media has a role to be skeptical and
should be skeptical and the public
should be skeptical you should question
authority you should hold people
accountable all this kind of stuff but
there's a difference between skepticism
and cynicism skepticism is healthy
questioning cynicism is saying that
there's no use in trying because
motivations are all sinister and that
just in history belies that point right
like if you go through his
the progress that we've made as a world
on many different issues shows that good
things can happen so I've been thinking
about this and I thought the other day
about how there was a week a few months
back is very interesting week in
American politics started with a young
man walking into a church in in
Charleston South Carolina and and you
know he shot up a shot up a black church
and and killed a lot of people and I
remember that I saw the president early
that week he was at a fundraiser in Los
Angeles where I live now and I he was
sort of reacting to the shooting and he
seemed he seemed pretty down he seemed
pretty frustrated because he knew that
once again we were going to have a
conversation about guns and gun violence
that might not go anywhere even though
we had just seen another mass shooting
in America and and so I could tell he
was little bit down and something by the
end of that week something had changed
in him he he walked into that church and
he gave a eulogy there and he started
talking about grace and the power of
grace and it was amazing because it was
and then he ends up singing Amazing
Grace in the church and basically the
message of that eulogy was this shooter
thought that by doing what he did he
would further divide this country and
yet watching the victims families say
they forgave him watching people come
together watching a community come
together Republicans and Democrats and
saying it's finally time to take down
the Confederate flag right the killer
didn't succeed at that goal and that
same day the Supreme Court of the United
States upheld the health insurance law
so for the first time in 100 years as we
as presidents of both parties have been
trying for 100 years there would be
something close to universal health care
coverage in America behind the rest of
the world but it finally happened
and over you know upheld the fact that
you know that gay marriage was legal in
America and I thought about everything
that had to happen to get to that point
on all those things the fact that on
race relations right that an
african-american president would walk
into a church in South Carolina and
singing Amazing Grace as the Confederate
flag came down and that he would go home
that night to a White House that was
bathed in rainbow colors because gay
marriage is legal for the first time and
all and I thought about like all the gay
Americans over the course of decades who
had to have like the courage to come out
to make that happen
and you know and in civil rights like
all the people who you know marched in
the streets for that to have happened
right first the progress on civil rights
and on health care all the people who
had stories of like loved ones they lost
because they couldn't afford health
insurance and you think to yourself like
it was it was very easy to be cynical
and down at the beginning of that week
when you saw another mass shooting but
then five days later you have this
moment of Hope where you realize we're
going to have bad things happen in this
country in this world and we're not
going able to fix them all but every
once in a while you get that good day
and that good day doesn't come on its
own it comes because you know a lot of
people work for thank you we will now go
to the member in the red jumper in the
front row yep like that um if you were
Bernie Sanders speechwriter particularly
if he wins the Democratic primary and
it's interfacing a general election
would you be encouraging him to drop his
self-proclaimed ideology of democratic
socialism because the word socialism
would turn off a lot of American voters
would you be encouraging him to keep his
integrity as you talked about in your
speech and sort of stick with it and
double down on it you know it's
interesting I actually think that it's
not so it's about keeping your integrity
for sure but I also think politically
he probably just needs to own it right
because this is again back to
authenticity right like Bernie Sanders
in the off chance I believe it's not
chance but I guess it's possible that
wins the nomination people aren't going
to just suddenly forget that he was a
Democratic Socialist but if he started
saying oh ya know I'm a Democrat now and
I just dropped the socialism thing then
you know his his biggest quality right
now the biggest reason people are
attracted to me is because he seems
authentic you know so I don't think he
can run away from that nor I don't think
he shouldn't right if he got that far he
just needs to explain to people what
that is now will that succeed it might
not succeed it might hurt them but I
think this is what I've been saying I
think there's a bigger danger in trying
to be someone that you're not and trying
to give up a position that you have it's
about integrity but it's also you know
it also dovetails with being you know
the politically smart thing to do at
least in my opinion thank you a question
if we could please go to the member in
the yeah Mike blue thank you for being
here today
political correctness requires us to
think very carefully about the words we
use that we don't have fund others does
political correctness play an active
role in shaping your word choice when
you write speeches for the President and
is word choice something that you have
always paid attention to before the
national discussions began on this topic
yes yeah I mean look the speech is all
about choices right and language is all
about choices and when you're at that
level right and it's I mean it probably
played an even greater role during in
the White House than it did in the
campaign trail because when you're
present United States and I mean there's
political correctness there's also you
know if I got an edit on something from
the Treasury secretary that I didn't
like and then the Treasury secretary
said well yeah if you don't say it that
way the stock market will collapse you
know I'm no economic expert so sure if
you know the defense secretary the CIA
says you can't say that or you know you
might start a war you have to listen to
them
those didn't those things didn't happen
but that was you know it's just giving
example um so ya know it you have to be
very careful and you know one thing
people have said before is ry than the
president maybe he didn't talk about
race is honestly in the White House or
as much in the White House no and I
think there's like there's two different
examples of this right during the
Trayvon Martin incident the president
very famously said you know if I had a
son he looked like Trayvon so he was on
the White House and you know he said
something that that was a comment on
race that you know was not an easy
comment to make okay
and then during some of the riots in
Baltimore or in Ferguson he was
criticized for not saying more about
race right there well he has another
consideration during those riots when a
major American city is on fire
which is do I want to say something that
could possibly inflame tensions even
more and actually lead to more violence
right so as president when you in the ER
in the year in that position of
authority in the position of power you
do have to choose your words carefully
to make sure that you know that you are
not generating real-world consequences
that are hurtful harmful so yeah so it's
careful but um the political correctness
thing is interesting from Obama's
perspective I think he talked about this
in an interview - you know there's a
tough balance right where you want to be
politically correct to an extent because
you don't want to you want to offend
people right but at the same time making
progress is about a clash of ideas and
being able to argue right and I'd rather
learn how to argue what I believe
against people that I really disagree
with we're really saying awful things
but I want to be in that arena you know
with those people and argue and I don't
want to say like oh if someone's coming
on college campus and they're speaking
and they're awful and you know we should
all just protest and not go it's like no
I want to go to that speech and give
that speaker the hardest time they've
ever got and I want to challenge them
and show them how stupid they are you
know like I thought that to me that's
how you win and you don't win by not
participating and just protesting it
right so that on the political
correctness thing that's where always
where I've been and
the presidents had something similar I
think the other week too we were in the
right place so I was going to say this
is a good book thank you for your
question
if we could please go to the member in
the blue jacket on the corner yeah thank
you could you please speak a little bit
about the process of developing the
State of the Union speech I've got to
imagine a speech that long with that
many different issues with that many
different goals
it's got to be quite an interesting
process interesting is a very charitable
word for it that's it's the it's the
hardest Beach to write because look you
sort of know at the outset that a a
speech that's going to last 50 minutes
to an hour is not going to be the most
memorable speech as I've been saying
like speeches of stories and you know if
you need longer than 20 or 30 minutes to
tell your story it's probably not a
story and it's more of a laundry list
and every year we would say at the
beginning of the State of the Union you
know this is the year it's going to be
different it's not going to be a laundry
list of policies and then every year you
know the policies just start creeping in
and that's just because you know the
point of the State of the Union is to
talk to the country about all your
priorities for that year domestic and
foreign right domestic international and
first of all giving any speech where you
talk about all the domestic priorities
in America and then everything's going
on in the world it's just it's a hard
story to tell and I mean we get to the
point early on in one of the state of
the union's I think on the foreign
policy side we got a criticism from
someone with internally that was like
you've mentioned every continent but
South America in this speech so we have
to we have to say something about South
America in the State of the Union we're
like I'm like well do we have anything
new to say about South America like is
there new policy or we go in there it's
like no but we just have to mention
something because otherwise you know
we're gonna screw up relations there and
you know it's back to what I was saying
about like sometimes you want to listen
to the stuff because yeah if if not
mentioning South America in the State of
the Union was actually going to damage
our relationship with our allies in
South America that would be a problem
and you'd rather make it a more boring
speech and keep the alliance as strong
then like keep your story right right
but that kind of thing happens over and
over on a whole bunch of different
issues and so the tension between you
know writing a state of view and that's
really that sings that's memorable
that's good and just trying to get the
job done is a very difficult you know
the process we try to keep the process
as small as possible on the State of the
Union so that it's not just everyone
gets to you know send in their wish list
and you just put it all on the speech
and that usually helps and also we meet
with the president before the State of
the Union and try to ask him like what
are your themes this year what are the
big takeaways from the speech that you
want and once we have that then we can
kind of go to everyone else who's trying
to get their pet project or their line
or their policy in and say look this is
what the president wants to talk about
and this doesn't fit and you know we'll
do another event on on your issue right
after the State of the Union and you
know we try to do it that way so but
it's not a fun process and you stay up
like you know till 2:00 or 3:00 a.m. two
or three weeks in a row it's it's it's
brutal
you know you never attempted a wheel
outs of Disney classic to response it up
a little bit no yes yeah yeah and thank
you for your question and if we can
please get you know right by the fire to
it yeah and the glasses thank you for
coming my question is do you think any
presidential candidate has the potential
to live up to the legacy that Obama will
leave when he that's only get in trouble
there um I don't know I honestly don't
um I think that it's hard to say that
now I'm very biased I very much love
Barack Obama I think he's been a
wonderful president I think he he will
be a history we'll treat him as a very
consequential president in a positive
way but I also think you have to leave
room for you know like in many ways
Barack Obama grew into the job right and
I think other candidates can be like
that too so there's people that we might
think today you know or not going to the
greatest president ever and then they
surprise you and a lot of it depends on
the issues that come up the events that
come up and how you make decisions based
on those issues
right so I think it remains to be seen
but I think look if you get to the level
that a lot of these people get to where
they're running for president there is
the potential to be you you hope at
least there me a lot of them not all of
them especially with some of the want
the candidates that we have today but um
you know I guess I guess time will tell
thank you it's time to two more
questions so could we please come to the
member right here on the front so
originally I wanted to ask you what your
best line was that remained undelivered
but perhaps it would be more appropriate
since you are very much focusing on
stories what's the best narrative that
you have built and remained undelivered
that's a very good question I don't know
and the reason I don't know is because
there's not too much time to think about
narratives that then don't go anywhere
because usually most of the writing that
I've had to do is for something that's
happening right now so I'm sorry sort of
wish there were times you could like sit
and dream about this is what I want to
know I think that we've been very lucky
in that most most things we wanted to
say about the country in the world most
things that Barack Obama has wanted to
say he has said and even if he didn't
wasn't able didn't have the opportunity
to say them while I was there I've
certainly noticed since he's left
especially in this last year he's been
able to do that I think he he believes
in this last year that there were
certain priorities where he can make
progress some with Congress some on his
own through executive orders and whatnot
and then he realizes there's a whole
bunch of issues that he may not be able
to make tangible progress on but he can
maybe help move the debate by speaking
about them and you know I don't think he
wants to leave anything out on the field
as he is he leaves office this year so I
think just about every narrative that he
wants to talk about and to deliver he
will do so this year
thank you and I was like one final
question if we could please go to we'll
go see the member with the glasses that
yes you in President Obama's last State
of the Union address he said that his
biggest regret or one of his biggest
regret is the divide that exists in
Congress um so what do you think he
could have done differently to bridge
the divide yeah it's it's it is the
unfinished work of his presidency it's
the unfinished work of of all of us and
in the in America look on one hand there
are some technical things that we can do
in our country to to help this right and
he's late I encourage for more on this I
would encourage you to read the speech
that he delivered in Illinois last week
he went back to the state capitol where
he announced his his his candidacy and
he sort of spoke about all the different
ways that you can we can fix our
politics so there's things like you know
our congressional districts right now
are drawn in drawn by politicians to
pick their voters basically if President
is a good line now we're you know
politicians shouldn't pick their voters
voters should pick their politicians and
right now a lot of these districts are
drawn in a way where a Democrat doesn't
have to worry about a challenge from a
Republican because there's so many
Democrats in the district and a
Republican doesn't have to worry about a
challenge from a Democrat because their
district is all Republican and when you
have districts like that you have
politics that become much more radical
much more ideological because what
you're worried about is that you get a
challenge from someone within your own
party because you're not adhering to the
party agenda as opposed to worried about
compromising we have voting issues in
America where you know too many people
are turned away from the polls and it's
not easy enough to vote and you have
some states where you know they take
away things like same-day registration
which would make it a lot easier to vote
you know we wanted in some states we're
trying to make sure that when you get
your license you automatically register
to vote right if we had more people
voting in our country that would that
would help fix our politics
getting money getting so much money out
of the system would help this issue the
Supreme Court made a decision in
Citizens United that has let you know
unregulated money flow through the
system billions and billions of dollars
and in these things called super PACs
and no one knows who funds them and it's
extremely corrosive on our democracy now
to fix that you either need a
constitutional amendment or you need a
different Supreme Court or you need a
whole bunch of different policies that
can actually reduce the influence of
money in politics so these are all
actual things that we can do but I think
what Obama has also said is that and I
very much believe this to be true I
think we've come to think of democracy
in our country as a little too
transactional which is you know people
go to the polls if they go to the polls
and you know I'm going to hand you my
vote I'm going to vote for this guy and
if I vote for you then you're going to
in turn fix the country you're going to
fix my problems and it's very
transactional and that's not what
democracy and a representative
government is supposed to be this is
self-government right and the idea
behind self-government is for citizens
to be involved not just on Election Day
but every single day and in America we
need to think of it that way and we need
to be more involved not just when we
vote but when we push our
representatives on things and when we
when we have a real public debate that's
not just soundbites thrown back and
forth on the news and so we always said
this in 2008 when he was running he said
you know the problems I'm talking about
they can't be solved in one year or one
term or one presidency and they
certainly can't be solved by one
president alone and I think no matter
who succeeds Barack Obama this election
or the next election after that or the
election after that like no one person
either in the presidency or in Congress
is going to be able to fix the problems
that we have in our country or the
problems that we have in the world the
way that it gets fixed is with an
engaged active citizenry and I believe
that Obama's work after he leaves the
White House will be directed towards you
know making sure that people stay
engaged in the political process in
public life in organizing and being part
of their community
and in really fulfilling the tenets of
self-government that are at the core of
our country thank you very much your
question John thanks very much that has
been absolutely fascinating if you could
all please remain seated well John this
chamber and one last time thanks very
much John for
you